Okay, we got him rolling again.
Okay, go ahead.
Okay, listen, in regard to systemic shock again, there were just a couple specific questions
on that book too I had.
Sandy, the little girl.
Right.
I took it that she befriended that Russian bore creature, and I wondered if you could
explain that.
I wasn't quite sure I'd caught it right.
Well, yes, you did catch it right.
It is, it happens to be the opinion of the zoologists and animal husbandry folk that
a pig next to a chimpanzee is just about the most intelligent animal around.
And we know that other animals have adopted human beings, children, babies.
We also know that there are pigs that are real pets.
They get to be little pesky devils.
In fact, one science fiction writer, a lady named Finn Mason, has told about the pigs
that they used to have that were, you see women, is it Finn?
Maybe I misspoke myself.
Let me start all over on that.
I have some information about animals that were, about pigs that were like, watch animals.
They really did the job.
And when you find that pigs are that smart, and they do sometimes really like human being,
then I wondered how likely it would be that a huge Russian bore might be Flynn, a tiny
human being.
Now, it's also true, and you probably know that as well as I, that around Edwards Plateau
there in South Central Texas, there are Russian bore.
Big ones.
None of them anything like a thousand pounds.
But having studied it, I found that the biggest Russian bore on record was something like
five hundred and fifty pounds.
And a Russian bore that big would be about the size of, almost as big as the Shetland Pony.
So it didn't seem to me so terribly unlikely that an extremely intelligent hog might be
a friend, a human being, especially with that human being, were completely without weapons
of any kind.
Okay, you, back earlier in the interview you had mentioned the proportion between entertainment
and message.
And in this particular book, I had a passage I'd marked here that I want to ask you about.
It seems to me that you are making some comments, not only about the situation in the world,
but some of the dangers.
Yeah.
And the quote I'm referring to is about the Boy Scouts.
To me you were paralleling the Boy Scout situation with the National one later.
And you say that placing oneself in a helpless position against known danger might be an evil
that generates its own punishment.
Yes.
Is that being applied to the nations?
Oh yes, any nation.
Whether it's, whether we're talking about an individual or a nation or someone in business.
I think it's, I think it's a general truth.
It might very well be examples you can show where it doesn't generate its own punishment,
but often it does.
I would say that when we're working together to help put the American public more in the
role to petroleum producing countries, that's an evil that generates its own punishment.
Right, okay.
One more question on that book.
I guess it's Contro.
Yep.
Some of your characters, I'm not sure what word I should use here, are almost what I would call,
as a literature teacher, sort of an anti-hero in the sense they're not the normal moral white hat.
I agree.
Kind of characters.
And I wonder, I don't know, why does that, they are deliberately picking anti-hero types.
Well, let's just say in relation to Contro, I won't generalize beyond that.
Okay.
Well, I entirely agree.
Contro is not a hero.
Contro is a youngster with some very unusual characteristics.
He has abilities that make him very likely to be useful for assassin jobs and so forth.
Does this make him a hero?
Not by any means.
I think Frank Herbert had a very good idea a long time ago when he was talking about the
problems that the hero, the whole idea, a hero, you know, generates a lot of trouble.
The more he went for the heroes in this world, the world would probably be a better place.
Anyway, for all of his rare abilities, Contro is also a great potential to be misused.
He is, he could be a great, metaphorically speaking, you know, he could be an Olympic
type pistol as a tool or he could be a setting tonight special as a tool.
He could be used well or he could be grossly misused.
And Contro is not a genius by any means.
There are lots and lots of flaws in the young man and he is misused grossly for quite a while.
You can't really very much call a man like that a hero.
And I didn't.
I wanted to show Contro with all of his, all of his foibles and his failures.
In the subsequent two books of the two sequels to systemic shock with Contro, I carry Contro
on through.
His developed bitterness at being misused is his cynicism that really works against him
as far as he and his lover are concerned.
He becomes cynical, becomes difficult to love anyone or to trust anyone.
And then in the third book, beginning to recognize necessarily that you've got to abandon your
youth before it abandons you.
The guy who is, for example, has always been a mountain climber and tries to jump a crevasse
15 feet wide as he could easily jump five years ago.
It does not occur to him, but maybe he can't jump it anymore.
This is a man who has not abandoned his youth, but maybe it's abandoned him.
It could kill you.
So recognizing the onset of age, abandoning your youth, you know, is a very important survival skill.
And with all of these things, I don't really think we can call Contro a hero.
He's got too many flaws in him.
He gets scarred up because he learns the hard way.
In short, he's very human.
Okay, right. Listen, I'm going to have to apologize here because you speak of sequels.
I was trying to run down everything you'd written and I couldn't find any sequels to that book.
Have they been published?
No. The immediate sequel to Systemic Shop is called Single Combat.
Single Combat will be published by Tor Books next October.
It's already finished. They've had it for several months, but the scheduling difficulties will be next October before it hits the stand.
There will be sketches inside the book showing hardware like what a hovercraft motorcycle would look like.
There are other items that might be a little difficult to visualize.
And I typically use preliminary design tactics, let's say, to go back and sketch out some of these things
and then have someone who is really a fairly decent sketch artist to turn my chicken spatches into rendering.
So.
That's a third book. Did you mention one there too?
The third book I am writing now and it's called Wild Country.
It is generally about Central, South Texas and Northern Mexico.
Okay, good. When I finished that book, I realized that there were, that seems to me, seemed to me that you had maybe left some open questions,
some open things that might generate a sequel.
Oh, yes. Very clearly.
Okay, let me just wind down by asking you some more general questions.
I guess, do you have any particular ideas or does it ever concern you about, say, the value of science fiction? It's important.
Yes, I consider it sometimes, but I'm not worried about it.
I'm not worried about it because I feel that science fiction is probably the most valuable fiction available to anyone today.
Certainly, it's our buffer against future shock if we'll only use it that way. It's an insulator, a lightning rod, if you will.
Science fiction does not have to be, but certainly can be, a means of making you ready for the future before you find yourself suddenly in it.
I was writing about computers and people talking to computers and they're talking back to them 25 years ago.
Now, I have a computer at home. It had not occurred to me 25 years ago that I really would have one at home.
I would have thought that was only for people like Howard Hughes, but sure enough, just about everybody can have one today, if you want one. Badly enough.
Science fiction has that very powerful value. It can also let you escape.
Certainly can be escaped literature. Do you think they need that kind of entertainment?
That's the kind of answer I was trying to get. I just asked Fray the question awkwardly. You made a reference a while ago in the interview. I want to maybe ask it to you as a formal question.
Why don't you consider writing fantasy?
I'm not really interested very much in writing about things that I don't believe in. That is, that I do not believe possible.
I would define fantasy as something that we know to be impossible.
Now, of course, there are some things that we quote no, unquote, to be impossible, to turn out to be possible after all.
But to the degree that I believe them to be impossible, then I believe making scenarios based on the impossible is one definition of fantasy.
And I have nothing against it or other people to do it.
But there are so many issues, real issues about important things, where I think need to be struggled with that the reader, the public in general needs to struggle with these issues, with these real things.
I think so much that I don't really have the time or never, never land. It's here in our land or soon to come land.
That's what I worry about a lot. I have children. I have grandchildren. I worry about those people. I worry about what's going to happen to them.
I don't want the future to spring on them like some great animal and cut them all up. I would like us to be ready and armed for the unpleasant parts of the future.
And so I don't feel that I have the time to spend on fantasy. Does that make sense to you?
Yeah, excellent. That's fine. Okay, I just had about two more questions then. As a media person, what's your opinion of the way the movies handle science fiction? Do they do it fairly?
Well, there are special effects to it marvelously well. The science is done very spartily. In 2001 it's very difficult to find a flaw in that.
Yet in Star Wars, well, Star Wars is a comic strip. It's a marvelous comic strip. And I've seen it before and I will probably see it again. So I'm not saying that I don't enjoy it.
I'm saying that most movies do not deal very well with the rational likelihoods of science. They deal very well indeed with all the special effects, the visual, eye-popping stuff.
There haven't been a whole lot of really good science fiction movies from the standpoint of philosophy, rational...
Just wait and let me think about this for a minute.
I think that there has been very little really good speculation in movies, scientific speculation.
I think they do a whole lot better job of showing spectacular visual effects than they do showing us the real likelihoods of the future based on our technology today.
Yeah, that's what most writers we talk to say about the same thing.
Yeah, that doesn't mean there can't be some really good ones once in a while. I was very taken by it, THX 1138. That was, to me, an excellently done movie. And relatively speaking, it cost about a nickel, you know.
Yeah, I thought that in terms of what you've been saying about a movie with some plot behind it, I thought Blade Runner had possibilities, but I don't think they brought them out well enough. Did you see that one?
Yes, I did. Well, it's a little hard to bring them all out if you ever read anything that was filled big. You know, he's dead now, died recently.
But take any book and try to translate it into a two-hour movie, and what you find is that you must first convince the book into a short story.
So they're just not rude for an awful lot of expansion of ideas on screen in the same way that you could do it in the book.
There were, out of all the books that I've written, I would say, I know that one has already been looked at for a movie, is Anastasia.
One movie company has studied that, and I didn't really expect them to buy it, and they didn't. But it would be much more likely that someone would produce a mouth, that short piece about a madman who gets hold of a pre-harvesting machine in a collection of stories in mind.
Now that's a fairly short story. You can get a little bit of technology about the combining of solid state, electronic, and human synapse and so forth, about putting all those together.
But it's short, it's brief, it does not go very far or field, it's not all encompassing with some philosophy of science. It's just a fast-paced story.
That's the sort of thing that would make it to our movie. Almost any of my books, the sort of books that would make a 10-hour movie. And there isn't just a whole lot of calls for a 10-hour movie.
So we wouldn't expect movies to do just a whole lot of justice to science when the viewer, the person that pays his ticket price, didn't come there to get informed about science to begin with.
And what they're to do is see the light show.
Right. Okay, listen, you said you're working on that third book about quantum for a while country. Is there anything else you're working on at the present time that you're planning to write?
Yeah, there's a short story that I'm doing that one of the theories, some stories I've already done in Omni has to do with a grizzled old semi-retired race car builder who occasionally is persuaded to build another vehicle for a race of some sort just for the fun of it.
And that's kind of meringue for me. I enjoyed taking you far out ideas in race cars 20 years ago and I still get a lot of mileage out of it, writing it up in stories. So I'm doing that as a short story and I am writing the wild country.
Okay, just to make sure I have some of my facts straight here, could you just off the top of your head, do you know how many short stories of yours have been published?
No, I don't. I would say 30 maybe.
Yeah, that's good enough. Okay. Listen, is there anything else that you would like to say, any kind of crusades or anything at all?
Well, I would say there are a couple of themes that have occupied me a lot. One of them other people have begun to come up to, begun to work on such that I can move on to something else again, I would say that sensible transportation, mass transit, cars that get 50 to 100 miles a gallon, things like that.
Things that I was demonstrating working on, building cars that got 50 miles a gallon 20 years ago from nobody else cares. Now, a lot of people care. And now I'm not interested in it much anymore because it's already been, not because of me really, but for whatever reason it has been taken up as an important issue.
The second thing along that line would be survival. Not only nuclear survival, but various other kinds. I write in survival publication. I design backpackers wood stove and all kinds of other gadgetry that would be very useful in survival context.
I've had to make my own snowshoes to get out of the high Sierra on one particular summer, which was hardly like a summer at all. It was very late spring. But survival, in particular the nuclear Holocaust survival issue is one that I have dealt with for two or three years now.
It is a game of enough importance that I'm moving on to something else now. And the thing that I'm moving on toward is what some people call the L5 situation or the L5 scenario, having to do with habitats, with colonies, literally built in space, so that we do not have to live all of us on Earth permanently.
Earth is a beautiful place, but if I had a poor heart, it might be very nice to live in a little place kind of like Earth except with only a third of our normal gravity. With trees and birds and everything you do want.
And no mosquitoes and no flies. We're leaving behind the things we don't want. I think that the human race's next major frontier is in building habitats out beyond Earth's atmosphere. That is a very important notion to me and that's where I'm doing a lot of my thinking today.
Yeah, that's great. We're always tremendously impressed. We interview a number of authors of course, we've been doing this for some time. We're always tremendously impressed with the, I guess, the renaissance attitude, the ability, the, I don't know, the jack of all trades, I guess, characters that science fiction writers have or the sharpest group of people that I think I know of.
Well, a lot of them are people who have succeeded or almost succeeded in a number of areas. A lot of people who do things like what I do today are people who are able to make a living financially, speaking, in some technological arena.
And so God damn, ground off at the stupid way where ideas were misused or not used at all, that they wanted to simply separate themselves from at all.
As a professor, I did not like to have to do things that I thought were counterproductive to the students for the benefit of some administrator in aerospace design.
It's, I really loathe having to design something that I knew was not optimum, you know, it has not been optimized because the man or the agency that required whatever I was designing had made a stupid requirement.
Nothing, you know, nothing could be more straightforward than that. Had made a requirement that was counterproductive, silly, stupid.
Well, but you can't tell them that. You can if you want them to go to somebody else.
But if your company wants to be the company that gets paid for doing this, then you're going to have to design it in an inferior way.
But that's what the customer wants. That's enough to make me tear my hair out.
And that's why I started designing, building cars in my own lab and new lubricants.
I have a lubricant in the Magnum, one of my cars, in which that oil hasn't been changed in 16 years.
Would you characterize yourself as an inventor?
Well, sure. I've done it.
Often enough, Lord knows. What I do, of course, is to give away ideas but get paid for the articles that I write on them.
I have long since become cynical about the way that our patent system works.
That usually the guy who invents something is the very last one to get anything out of it.
You have to sign papers when you go to work for a company that says everything you invent, everything, 24 hours a day, belongs to the company.
Even if you're working in a company that refines salt and you invent a new hat pin, the salt company gets the hat pin.
And you, as the inventor, might or might not ever get something out of it after everybody else has been paid off.
I really despise that. So what I do is to find a magazine somewhere that will pay me a thousand bucks for an article on it.
And I get paid off right now. And I make it the idea of public domain so that no one can ever patent it, ever.
Actually, that, as far as I'm concerned, is very much to the point with the human race. It just doesn't let the managerial cadre get away with all these things.
The fiberglass rivet technique was something I gave away in road and track about 12, 14 years ago.
Well, I guess you could also be called a futurist then.
Well, I have been. I've been called a number of things in the future. It's one of the nicest ones.
Okay, listen now, Dr. Ring, I've taken enough of your time. I've got to get ready for class, too. I've got to teach in a little bit.
Listen, what we do is this. We're going to get a number of shows out of this. Our show is on every day of the week for five minutes. It's a spot show.
Right.
So usually with an interview of this length, we're going to probably get at least a week, maybe two out of it.
I think.
So what we do is, as I said, we'll edit them and put them on the, we'll send you the copies of the edited shows.
Now, probably there's going to be some lead time here. We're going to have to go about maybe, we're going to have a couple weeks of repeats right over the Christmas holiday.
So I imagine it's going to be end of January 1st, February 4th, we get on the air with these.
Okay.
So we'll send you copies about that time.
As far as I know, there is no station in your area that carries it.
We only have, I think, near 30 stations right now nationwide who have us.
But there's some big metropolitan areas, one Cleveland and Detroit and some places like that.
I think we're in Sacramento, California, for instance, in places, but we're trying to get a sponsor. We're trying to get some more money so we can, you know, expand.
Right.
But as far as I know, there's no station in that part of Oregon where you can pick it up, but you will have the copies of the tape.
That's enough.
And listen, I sure appreciate the time you've given us.
And we look forward to your future work.
Well, thank you.
Okay, then take care.
Okay.
Thank you.
Bye.